.\" $Id: viperc.man,v 1.29 2011/11/16 13:53:40 lhf Exp $
.TH VIPERC 1 "$Date: 2011/11/16 13:53:40 $"
.SH NAME
viperc \- Viper compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B viperc
[
.I options
] [
.I filenames
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B viperc
is the Viper compiler.
It translates programs written in the Viper programming language
into binary files containing precompiled chunks
that can be later loaded and executed.
.LP
The main advantages of precompiling chunks are:
faster loading,
protecting source code from accidental user changes,
and
off-line syntax checking.
Precompiling does not imply faster execution
because in Viper chunks are always compiled into bytecodes before being executed.
.B viperc
simply allows those bytecodes to be saved in a file for later execution.
Precompiled chunks are not necessarily smaller than the corresponding source.
The main Viperal in precompiling is faster loading.
.LP
In the command line,
you can mix
text files containing Viper source and
binary files containing precompiled chunks.
.B viperc
produces a single output file containing the combined bytecodes
for all files given.
Executing the combined file is equivalent to executing the given files.
By default,
the output file is named
.BR viperc.out ,
but you can change this with the
.B \-o
option.
.LP
Precompiled chunks are
.I not
portable across different architectures.
Moreover,
the internal format of precompiled chunks
is likely to change when a new version of Viper is released.
Make sure you save the source files of all Viper programs that you precompile.
.LP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-l
produce a listing of the compiled bytecode for Viper's virtual machine.
Listing bytecodes is useful to learn about Viper's virtual machine.
If no files are given, then
.B viperc
loads
.B viperc.out
and lists its contents.
Use
.B \-l \-l
for a full listing.
.TP
.BI \-o " file"
output to
.IR file ,
instead of the default
.BR viperc.out .
(You can use
.B "'\-'"
for standard output,
but not on platforms that open standard output in text mode.)
The output file may be one of the given files because
all files are loaded before the output file is written.
Be careful not to overwrite precious files.
.TP
.B \-p
load files but do not generate any output file.
Used mainly for syntax checking and for testing precompiled chunks:
corrupted files will probably generate errors when loaded.
If no files are given, then
.B viperc
loads
.B viperc.out
and tests its contents.
No messages are displayed if the file loads without errors.
.TP
.B \-s
strip debug information before writing the output file.
This saves some space in very large chunks,
but if errors occur when running a stripped chunk,
then the error messages may not contain the full information they usually do.
In particular,
line numbers and names of local variables are lost.
.TP
.B \-v
show version information.
.TP
.B \-\-
stop handling options.
.TP
.B \-
stop handling options and process standard input.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR viper (1)
.br
The documentation at viper.org.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages should be self explanatory.
.SH AUTHORS
R. Ierusalimschy,
L. H. de Figueiredo,
W. Celes
.\" EOF
